Clone - PVC/PV (#274)
openshift/openshift-origin-design: web-console/4.0-designs/storage/Clone/clone.md

# Clone - PVC/PV

## Main use cases
Create clone (from where PVC/snapshot is)
All other List, View, Delete, Modify actions are that of a PV/PVC

#### Notes:
- Alpha support in Kubernetes v1.15
- critical for stateful workloads, especially databases
- similar behavior to creating a snapshot
- From user’s perspective, a clone is another PVC/PV; however contents of a clone is that its PV is populated from contents of a PV at creation time.

> - After creation, the clone behaves just like any other PV.

Reviewer: should this read "any other PVC/PV" ? It sounds like here when you clone a PVC it results in a PV, is that true?

Reviewer 2: @matthewcarleton When you clone a PVC (which would have a backing PV), it will result in another PVC being created (along with a backing PV).  The new PVC created will be populated using the contents of the source backing PV at creation time.

Reviewer 3: @julienlim - How does that work? The original PVC is bound to a PV I'm assuming, would the newly created PVC via clone just sit there unbound?

Reviewer 2: @lizsurette The newly created PVC (clone) will dynamically create a matching PV to back it.  You will not be able to create a PVC completely if there is no backing PV and underlying backing storage.  As previously noted, a clone works pretty much like a PVC/PV.  There is only 1 piece of metadata that is changed in the YML which basically indicates the source when you create it via YML.  Other than that, it's really the same as a PVC/PV.

- clone using create volume from existing snapshot or existing PV

> - Cloning only support with CSI drivers (and not for in-tree or Flex drivers)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Cloning is only supported with CSI drivers (and not for in-tree or Flex drivers)
```

- To enable the Kubernetes Volume Cloning feature 
- enabled via the PersistentVolumeClaim.DataSource.Kind field
 
## User Stories

> As a Developer, I want to be able to create a clone of a PVC.

Reviewer 3: Should we have another user story around cloning a PV?

Reviewer 2: +1 @lizsurette

- Name - suggest a default, e.g. clone-timestamp
- Select source PVC
- Requested size (this capacity must be specified and must be >= the capacity of the source volume)
- Scheduling support
- Note: The Create Clone action should only be exposed for PVCs backed by supported CSI drivers that support cloning.
 
#### Notes:
- Cloning action is only presented for drivers that support cloning.
- This may only apply to ceph-rbd (block-based PVs and snapshots).

## PVC/PV Clone Workflow
### List Page

> ![PVC List Pgae](img/PVC-List-Clone-01.png) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![PVC List Page](img/PVC-List-Clone-01.png) 
```

Clicking on the clone option in the kebab menu will open the clone modal

> ![PVC List Pgae](img/PVC-List-Clone-02.png) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![PVC List Page](img/PVC-List-Clone-02.png) 
```

#### Clone Modal
The clone modal includes a field for name and the pvc details. 

> ![PVC List Pgae](img/PVC-List-Clone-03.png) 

Reviewer: typically you'd be able to view the annotations. Is it important here to provide them, rather than just stating how many there are?

Reviewer: nitpic: for the name, if it's auto-generated it should be an input with text rather than just placeholder text.

Reviewer 2: > typically you'd be able to view the annotations. Is it important here to provide them, rather than just stating how many there are?

@matthewcarleton This is following existing OCP Console way of displaying annotations.  AFAIK, annotations are used to provide metadata about the resource.  See https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/annotations/ for more details.  Currently we seem to be using labels more so than annotations for more noteworthy metadata.

Reviewer: @julienlim I was just wondering if it's useful to show the actual annotations (key/value pairs) rather than just the count. Are there other cases in the console where you'd have a summary of a resource and just show the count for annotations but not the key/value pairs? Again I'm just learning more about this specifically so more questions than comments :)

Reviewer 4: @matthewcarleton We typically only show the count for annotations even on the details page. The only way to see the key/value pairs currently is to go to the edit modal (or YAML). I think part of the reasoning is that annotations can have super long values so they could end up taking up a ton of space if we showed all of them. Mary is looking into our edit standard right now but this conversation came up and I think it'll be part of a follow on!

> ![PVC List Pgae](img/PVC-List-Clone-03.png) 

Reviewer 3: Should this be in a full-page form? I think the design convention is that if it's a form of larger than 2-3 fields it would be consistent to do full page. Maybe worth checking in with @rileyhuston on that though.

> ![PVC List Pgae](img/PVC-List-Clone-03.png) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![PVC List Page](img/PVC-List-Clone-03.png) 
```

While cloning the status of the selected PVC will change to “Cloning” 

> ![PVC List Pgae](img/PVC-List-Clone-04.png) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![PVC List Page](img/PVC-List-Clone-04.png) 
```

Reviewer 5: @matthewcarleton is the PVC field a search field? Is it standard in OpenShift to not have a search icon? In PatternFly filters we tend to use a search icon on filtering https://www.patternfly.org/v4/design-guidelines/usage-and-behavior/filters/#behavior-3

Reviewer: @rachael-phillips yup! FYI @yuvalgalanti probably a detail that would get picked up in dev anyway but good to keep the designs consistent :)

> When cloning is done a new pvc will be created. The status depends with how the new PVC get bound. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When cloning is done a new PVC will be created. The status depends on how the new PVC gets bound.
```

Reviewer: Should you elaborate on this? What are the different scenarios for varying statuses?

Reviewer 2: @matthewcarleton The PVC status / lifecycle is well-documented in Kubernetes, and IMHO we should refer to official Kubernetes documentation whenever possible.  See https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/release-1.1/docs/user-guide/persistent-volumes.md#lifecycle-of-a-volume-and-claim, i.e.

- Available -- a free resource that is not yet bound to a claim
- Bound -- the volume is bound to a claim
- Released -- the claim has been deleted, but the resource is not yet reclaimed by the cluster
- Failed -- the volume has failed its automatic reclamation

Reviewer: ah thanks! maybe useful in this doc to link out to that then?

Reviewer 3: +1 to documenting this. Also, maybe a note as to what is expected by default on cloning a PVC?

> ![PVC List Pgae](img/PVC-List-Clone-05.png) 

Reviewer 3: Would we make use of the status popover to give the user more information about this pending status and expose any further action they could take?

> ![PVC List Pgae](img/PVC-List-Clone-05.png) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![PVC List Page](img/PVC-List-Clone-05.png) 
```

> ![PVC List Pgae](img/PVC-List-Clone-06.png) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![PVC List Page](img/PVC-List-Clone-06.png) 
```

### Details Page

> The same action menu we show in the list page when clicking on the kebab menu is also available when clicking on the actions menu in the details page. the clone modal is practically the same. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same action menu we show in the list page when clicking on the kebab menu is also available when clicking on the actions menu in the details page. the clone modal is the same. 
```

> ![PVC List Pgae](img/PVC-Details-Overview-Clone-01.png)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![PVC List Page](img/PVC-Details-Overview-Clone-01.png)
```
